Waste is one of the most explicit signs of the pervasiveness of global industrial production. The fact that most of the manufactured materials are not reincorporated into production represents itself a systemic unbalance. Approaches such as cradle-to-cradle, circular economy and the doughnut economy point to how unsustainable the current production paradigms are. Alternatively to a linear mode of production, often described as based on a single-directional paradigm of "take - make - dispose", authors and organisations active in those fields propose moving towards cyclic and regenerative practices. In that scenario, a boom of initiatives promoting regenerative practices organise their practices to promote change around ideas such as zero waste, upcycling and the right to repair.

With a handful of remarkable exceptions, however, local and regional authorities are often blind to that discussion. And that scale - local and regional - is precisely the scale of the public sector that is usually responsible for handling waste and materials discarded by households and organisations. My PhD research investigates waste prevention through commons-based practices of reuse, including repair, upcycling and re-circulation. Beyond the direct environmental benefits of repair, there are interesting avenues to experiment regarding social inclusion, citizen engagement and sustainable entrepreneurship. I am particularly interested in exploring the idea of transformation labs: public infrastructure enabling local communities to reuse material goods. Such labs would be hybrids of makerspaces, repair cafes, reuse centres, tool libraries and civic spaces. This paper will highlight the findings of three design research studies and advance a replicable blueprint for transformation labs.
